for this week i've chosen the topic of
the milky way so officially this would
be once around the milky way
which might take a little bit longer
than usual for some of the talks
but anyway there's a magnificent picture
of the milky way going across the sky
from the horizon to horizon down to the
right where the sunset is there
taken uh not by myself but by somebody
else from
nasa down there from the southern
hemisphere
you always get the best views from the
southern hemisphere as we will see
but the original uh to the story of the
milky way goes back
a very long time ancient uh people with
uh
no light pollution to contend with were
able to see it
very clearly arching across the sky uh
to different or
lesser extent depending on which part of
the world they were from
and they saw it as a milky
faint patch of light or stripe of light
going across the sky um and
noticed a few things about that they
noticed
that immediately that it always stayed
in the same place
relative to the stars around it so it
seemed to move with the fixed stars
as the sky wheeled overhead
and as you see on the screen here
aristotle had a good think
about what it might be and
i'll quote here the translation here he
said that the milky way might be the
ignition
of fiery exhalations of some stars
which were large numerous and close
together
that's quite an interesting description
and he sort of got the idea that it
might be a lot of stars
packed very close together but he didn't
assume that it was that
as such he thought it was some sort of
fiery gas
or exhalation that had come from a lot
of closely packed stars
he then said the ignition takes place in
the upper part of the atmosphere
in the region of the world which is
continuous with the heavenly motions
in other words it was in the realm of
the fixed stars
which was deemed to be the outer reaches
of the known world
in the sky beyond the realm of the
planets and everything else that moved
so he sort of got got it right that it
was moving like that but of course it's
not in the upper part of the atmosphere
at all
but he thought it was some sort of
burning gas very high in the sky
uh i suppose so he sort of partly
noticed a few things that were right
partly got it wrong
the first record we can find of the idea
definitely being that it is a myriad of
stars packed
tightly together is from uh
persian middle eastern uh philosophers
and astronomers and this particular
gentleman whose seal we have at the
upper right of the screen
in arabic and whose name i can never
pronounce uh
particularly said that this was a myriad
of tiny stars packed together
in the sphere of the fixed stars and the
stars are larger than planets and i'm
not quite sure how he worked that out
other than perhaps that he thought that
the
realm of the fixed stars was much
further away
but therefore these things must be
larger if we can see them at all
so he's almost on the right track
of course he didn't have the benefit of
the telescope
and it was galileo of course
who got the first opportunity to take
the newly invented telescope
pointed at the stars and figured out
in his book here that the milky way was
thousands and thousands of stars packed
together and the telescope resolved
the smudgy uh milky look of it
into individual stars bringing the
resolution
that nobody else has been able to
achieve
well the first person that figured out
that the milky way was probably
what we would now call the plane of our
galaxy
was this philosopher emmanuel kent
very much did it on the basis of other
people's
uh studies and results and thinking
about what might cause them
and he proposed the milky way might be
this great structure of stars whirling
together
held together by gravity he was speaking
after kepler's laws and newton's law of
gravity and so on had all been explained
to describe how planets orbit in the
solar system
so he figured that the galaxy might have
a self-gravitating structure as a
whirling disk
of many many stars all orbiting around
common center of mass and very much
got that right
now the tricky bit of course is when you
look at our galaxy
from inside we see very much uh
this band of light the individual stars
within it and the
dark dusty lanes carving across that
structure
but it's very difficult to figure out
what shape it is
we have to really infer it by looking at
all the other galaxies
and in particular we've got the outer
limits galaxy at the bottom here ngc
891 which shows that dark dust lane
carving across the center
and uh orangey looking bulge
in the middle and the bluer looking
outstretched spiral arms
when we look at that if you imagine that
stretched
and wrapped around the sky then it
matches
up the uh image that we see of being
inside our own galaxy this
central bulge of the galaxy in the milky
way corresponds to this region
with the dark dust lines across it so it
sort of makes sense
but we have to do it by looking at other
galaxies
and then trying to figure out which
structures match
what we can see of our own
1785 william herschel had the first
serious go
at mapping the galaxy and with the gaia
satellites up there now doing it in
exquisite accuracy and
mapping the 3d positions of a billion
stars
or better time to celebrate work of
herschel here because
this diagram that he drew looks a little
bit like some sort of tentacled sea
monster
is uh actually quite a scientific
approach
to solving the problem he's plotted us
in the center here this dark spot in the
middle of the diagram
and every other dot there is a bright
star that he
observed and catalogued its uh position
and he's plotted them radially out from
the center
of the uh position where we are
according to their sky coordinates
mapping the 3d of the sky down onto two
dimensions to get it onto a sheet of
paper
and for the radial dimension the
distance from the center
he has used the brightness of the star
as seen from the earth
and what he said about this was that he
knew it was a gross approximation but he
said that
he had no way of knowing if all stars
were equally
powerful but
if he assumed that they were all roughly
the same
and their differences in brightness were
solely therefore due to
the standard candle effect of distance
where the brightness of an object if you
double the distance you'll see it a
quarter is bright
he said well i i don't know the true
power but if i just
use distance as a proxy or use
brightness as a proxy for distance
i can plot them out on the diagram and
that's what he's done here
and what you can see is it's resulted in
a shape that is longer
along the horizontal axis than it is
vertically
so a flattened structure and
that it's got these two very long arms
out this side
um with a gap between them where there
was nothing observed
and that it's unsymmetrical and that the
uh there are more stars to one side than
the other
and we as we will see that's actually
not a bad
representation of the geometry of our
galaxy
now the story goes on that we were
observing
these other galaxies out in space
although back in the day they were
referred to as nebulae
meaning cloud of gas because we couldn't
resolve them well enough to truly see
the structure
lord ross with his enormous uh 72-inch
reflector
was the first to really see the spiral
structure
in these so-called nebulae
and in particular the whirlpool nebula
drawing on the left there is
one of his where it could well have been
some sort of spiral whirling
hurricane-like
structure of gas and dust whirling
around
in a cloud inside our galaxy
but some people were beginning to
think that actually emmanuel kant's idea
of the milky way galaxy might well mean
that these objects were other galaxies
further away outside the milky way and
this uh
argument raged for many years
culminating in
the great debate in the 1920s in america
between harlow shapley and herbert
curtis
shapley was arguing that the milky way
was the entire universe
and that the spiral nebulae were just
clouds of whirling gas and dust
inside the milky way and that the whole
universe was there for
roughly 50 000 light years across
because that seemed to be the size
estimate
that was best for the size of the milky
way
whereas herbert curtis leading a group
of others
argued that the spiral nebulae were what
he
termed separate island universes
separate as in outside of the milky way
and if the milky way was a universe
these were other
separate island universes we uh
now call these things galaxies
and the
term island universe has really been
consigned to the bin of history
one thing that he showed was that there
were more novi
more flare stars from exploding stars
in the andromeda nebula than there was
observed in the whole of the rest of the
milky way
and he argued that if these were just
exploding stars then it showed that the
andromeda nebula
probably had more stars than they were
in the whole of the milky way
and if that was the case then it was a
larger separate
galaxy not part of our own because it
would have been far too
small to have had that many stars in it
we also studied these objects globular
clusters
we see these orbiting around the outside
of the milky way we have about four or
five hundred of them
that have been detected and they consist
of hundreds of thousands to
about a million stars for the largest
all tightly packed together in these
roughly spherical structures
and often containing very very old stars
and shapley produced a map of the
distribution of galaxies around the
milky way
what this showed was that if we plotted
them on
galactic coordinates as little red dots
like this
um and here we have the sun then there
were far more of them to one side than
there are to the other
and this very much suggested that if
they were symmetrically
distributed around some center then we
were off to the side
of that center and therefore
perhaps identified that we were off
center relative to the galaxy
if the center of the distribution of
clusters was all
centered on the center of mass of our
galaxy
that's what this all made sense and
supported
the general estimate of the size of the
galaxy
it also identified our place within it
and matches that map from herschel
rather well
with the unsymmetrical shape and
distribution
so we now have a picture somewhat like
this
of our galaxy with a central bulge
and a flat disc rather like two fried
eggs back to back
surrounded by this swarm of these
globular clusters
and the interesting thing was that we
were able to measure the distance to
some of those globular clusters
and that goes back to what we talked
about in an earlier lecture about
sizing the universe and the use of
cepheid variables
to pin down the distances the cepheid
variables just as a recap are special
type of variable star
named after the lead star of the class
delta sephi
that pulsate in brightness
on a regular basis and the rate of
pulsation is directly
proportional to their overall power
output
so we can infer that their standard
candles
and use them from their apparent
brightness to infer distance
so they were used to help map the
globular clusters
and we were also able to then have
this man edwin hubble solve the debate
once and for all
by identifying a plot
a cepheid variable in the andromeda
nebula
marked on the diagram up here in this
little box he's written n and crossed it
out
n for nova because he realized it was
repeating
its cycles and therefore was a severed
variable
and he showed using that distance to
period relationship that the
andromeda nebula was at least one
million light years away
which was 20 times the distance to any
known object in and around
the milky way including all those
globular clusters
and therefore the andromeda nebula was
in fact the andromeda
galaxy and a separate island universe
to use that term thus ending that great
debate
so nowadays when we look at the milky
way we have lots of other tools
available to us this is the picture
of the center of the milky way
taken from the southern hemisphere we've
got the central bulge
here showing that orangey color orange
because it contains no
new stars and therefore only old stars
and the only stars that get to live to
be old
are the slow burning
yellow orange and red dwarf stars all
the
more exciting uh hot white and blue
stars live fast and die young and
therefore
burn out and blow up and so where you
see
hot young blue stars you know that
there's been recent star formation
and there just hasn't been any in the
center whereas in the
spiral arms as we will see there's lots
of it
you also see the dust lane across the
middle very nicely leading out
towards the spiral arms
but we can use different wavelengths
these days
another of herschel's discoveries in
fact was infrared
radiation but we've now got telescopes
that can take us
from the visible into the infrared the
microwaves
the ultraviolet the x-ray gamma ray
radio waves
right the way across all the possible
size ranges and energy
levels of these electromagnetic waves
so here's an all-sky picture taken of
the milky way
in infrared this this shape this
elliptical shape is where we've
unwrapped the whole
sky from a sphere onto a two-dimensional
surface
and kept the shape correct so it's a
projection
and again you can see the bulge of the
milky way in the middle and
we're beginning to see through some of
that dust because infrared can often
penetrate through the dust
better than a normal visible light can
we can go to longer wavelengths and the
galaxy looks like this
which is interesting in itself we're now
seeing the cold
gas rather than the hot and warm objects
and we're including fingers of cold gas
that go
out in great loops around the uh
the galaxy like this and these are
evidence that points to how the
galaxy formed by merging lots of smaller
galaxies together
we can also go the other way to high
energies to x-rays
and look at very hot gas and we find
that
it's confined to the plane of the milky
way and
with a number of very hot spots one
right in the center here
and others out in other regions here is
the crab nebula that we talked about
last week
glowing in x-rays there are another
couple of uh
pulsars the baylor pulsar and the
geminigo pulsars are very bright sources
of x-rays
in our galaxy but we've also got this
thing here
this is a distant galaxy blazer 3c
the cambridge third survey 454.3
goes up by the exciting catalog number
and this is way off
and across the far side of the universe
it's a quasar
uh that's emitting very strongly in the
x-rays that you don't see in the other
pictures
so of course there's the crab nebula
taken in high resolution
showing the spinning pulsar and the jets
emerging from it
so that's what these pulsars inside the
milky way look like
so using all those tools uh we've been
able to put together
a map of the galaxy as if we were
looking down on it from the
galactic north pole and
what we find is the spiral arms whirling
around the center
and we are here
the sun and the solar system in the uh
what
douglas adams described as the less
fashionable quarter
of the orion spur which is itself
a separated separate little
uh spiral armlet that forks away from
the main sagittarius arm
back here it splits into there's one
piece that goes around this way
and one in which we are that almost
crosses back outwards
so what we see from the sun looking in
towards the center
which is seen from the southern
hemisphere of the earth because our
south pole points in that general
direction is
the bright nucleus and the thick star
clouds
of uh the constellations of sagittarius
which are made up of material in
the sagittarius and centurious spiral
arms in the main
and when we look the other way out we
see the constellation of orion
and through beyond orion in the orion
spur
we then see the next layer of stars in
the perseus arm
it's very noticeable if you look in the
distances
of the catalog distances of
things like star clusters and nebulae
that from the northern hemisphere we
tend to see
a first rank of objects that are about
1200 to 1600 light years away and those
are all in the orion spur and then
there's an enormous void
between there and about seven thousand
light years which is the next uh
band of material and that's in the
perseus arm and that we see another
whole cluster of those
and then there's another void until you
get to the uh
thinner regions of the outer arm much
fainter
so we can see it already just in the in
the structure
of the pattern of distances to objects
and the same works
going the other way only it tends to be
more dense
towards the middle
now you also have seen in that previous
picture that
we think that the milky way has a bar
across the center and there are
competing theories about that
some people don't believe that there's a
bar at all others believe
it's a short bar 3500 light years long
others that it's a long bar and some
people even
argue that we have two so i'll leave
that there for you
borrowing from a joke that mickey gave
at the cambridge young astronomers
thank you mickey um and uh we just don't
know
quite what's happening in the middle
there because we can't see very well
but we do have some
idea of some of the interesting things
that are going on
deep within the galactic center
so let's have a look well surrounding
that
bar of gas we think there is a a ring of
material
that's much denser so it's about 15
000 light years from the center we're at
about
27 000 light years so it's a halfway
between the center and us there's this
ring
with a lot of hydrogen gas and
a lot of new star forming regions and of
course these go with
tending to attract a lot of dust and
material that's why we can't see very
well
but if we were viewing it from outside
our galaxy
this would probably be a very prominent
feature in the milky way
but if we dive right into the center
this is a real picture
um that's been synthesized by taking all
the different
optical um infrared ultraviolet
and x-ray pictures and merging them
together
this is the sort of structure that's
going on right
in the center
what we've got deep in the middle here
is an x-ray source called sagittarius a
star
which we think is right at the hub of
everything right in the central region
and then lots of others and there's
another one that i'm going to talk about
which is this dark dust cloud
over here to the left you can see
stretching away
quite a long distance and that's that a
giant molecular cloud
of dirty dusty material called
sagittarius b2
so we're going to have a look at what
these two objects are and the
interaction between them
so sagittarius a star x-rays right from
the center
of the galaxy and we think these x-rays
are coming from
a disc of matter that is swirling around
and being sucked into a supermassive
black hole
so it's deep in the middle of the galaxy
in here
and we can drill into that with a high
resolution x-ray image
and see various hot gas regions but in
particular the brightest
source is indicated there the
sagittarius a star
but our instruments are so good we can
zoom in further
on that region we find a star cluster
and right in the center of the star
cluster we find
the hot ring of gas very bright in the
center
then in the little inset there that's
the most detailed
resolution picture we've got
what we're looking at is the hot gas
surrounding the central object
that is emitting in x-rays probably has
a temperature
around a million degrees and is moving
in a spiral in towards the center
under the gravity of the object in the
middle
what we can't see is the black hole
itself now you may recall there was a
fantastic image
of the accretion disk and the black hole
in the center of
the large elliptical galaxy m87
published a couple of years ago now
using what was
termed the event horizon telescope
that's a telescope comprising lots of
radio
telescopes from the whole of the earth
all combined to give the highest
resolution photograph ever
now they have been attempting to
synthesize a picture
of the black hole which would be right
in the center of this little disc here
for some time now but they've not yet
published the
image that they're creating so uh
there's been various technical
difficulties one of which is
that it's changing and moving over time
and so the usual trick of taking a long
exposure
is resulting in a blurred image so uh
having problems
with uh trying to do the detailed
photography
but fairly soon we should get an even
more high resolution image of what's
going on right
in the center what we have done is
studied the stars in that star cluster
right in the center and plotted their
movement
in orbit around this unseen object
which is marked at position with the red
cross there
and you can see these stars are orbiting
in the classic
elliptical paths of course it's in 3d
and flattened here so some of these
look very long and thin due to the
effect of perspective
and we have to figure all of that out
which you can do
using spectroscopy to work out the
motion
um but we've got one particular star
which is this one that's called s2
which is in a very handy elliptical
orbit that's pretty much face
onto us and goes around in 15 years
and so it's very straightforward when
you have an orbiting object like this
to use kepler's laws and newton's
formula for gravity
and work out the mass in the center and
i
get my various young astronomy students
who are doing
gcse to do this and they come out with a
figure at around about four million
solar masses all concentrated where the
red x is
and you can do the same calculation for
other members of the star group you get
the same answer
but i want to draw your attention to the
one on the very thin orbit that comes in
from
top left look how close that goes
to the x and it goes even closer than
the star s2 does
it's going so close in fact that the
size of
the object that's in the center that's
controlling all the others
under gravity is smaller than uh the
orbit of saturn
around the sun that's still quite a big
object
but the only way to pack four billion
sorry four million
solar masses into such a small space
is for it to be a black hole and of
course we can't see
the object so that all points to a very
solid evidence of a supermassive black
hole there
and of course we think all galaxies have
such a supermassive black hole in them
so that's the object sagittarius a star
it's a 4 million
solar mass black hole with an accretion
disk
around it pouring out x-rays from the
accretion disk
as the matter is spiraling inwards
now it's going to say a few words about
the
molecular cloud sagittarius b2
it's hit the news for a couple of
reasons it's a giant molecular
cloud so a thing like the orion nebula
in some senses
390 light years from the center of
uh sagittarius a star and 150 light
years across
there's three million solar masses of
material
in this cloud itself so if it all
collapsed it would make another black
hole
about the same mass as the supermassive
one
in fact there is a star cluster growing
within it it's forming lots of new stars
so it's not collapsing into a single
object
temperature cold as is often the case
for these uh clouds of gas if they
weren't
if they were hot the molecules would
soon escape
so they have to be cold to retain their
existence
but just 40 degrees above absolute zero
and we've been studying it intensely
looking to see what it's made of there's
obviously lots of hydrogen gas
there there's quite a lot of silicon
dust grains
various metal silicates carbon
in the foot in the dust that sort of
thing
but we've also been able to use radio
telescopes
to do spectroscopy and pick up lots of
interesting
molecules and the first two are
ethanol ordinary uh alcohol
as you would uh drink in an alcoholic
beverage
and another one called ethyl formate
given the chemical formulae there
but i won't bore you with the details
there's a whole list of other things in
there that would make
a cocktail of this rather a knockout
it's got ether in it
so that wouldn't do you any good if you
drank it propylene oxide very volatile
and nasty
methyl formate methanol lots of
myths in there and propylene cyanide as
well
but the interesting one that hitler used
was the ethyl formate
this molecule here because
this would mean that if you took that it
would smell
of raspberries and taste of rum so
ethyl formate is what gives rum and
partly what give raspberries their
characteristic flavor
and so you could make a raspberry
daiquiri out of
material from sagittarius b2
and there is more ethanol there than
all of the oceans of the earth contain
water
by a factor of a billion to one
so they're not messing about there's a
they
say there's a bar at the center of the
milky way well it seems it's been
serving raspberry daiquiris
the other interesting thing that caused
b2 to hit the news
was that it was giving off x-rays
and you don't normally get x-rays from a
cold
region of gas well it turns out that
this was a temporary phenomenon and you
can see in the four
images to the right taken at different
times by
different x-ray telescopes so we've got
2000 2004 2005
and the the color indicates that the
temperature with
red colors and white meaning hottest so
the chandra
in 2000 saw this patch of b2
flare up in hot x-rays and then cool off
again
and you can see the first photograph was
catching it on the rise in temperature
so this hot spot developed and then
faded away
very curious feature indeed it turned
out it was effectively
energy from sagittarius a star from the
accretion disk of the black hole being
thrown out as high energy
x and gamma rays across the 350 light
year
gap from sagittarius a star to
to sagittarius b and
that was then lighting up the gas in
sagittarius b2
energizing it to emit x-rays which have
then come back to us
and so what happened was that 350 years
ago
relative time actually of course both of
these objects
are 26 000 light years from us
so 26 350 years ago
sagittarius a star flared up
and sent an enormous pulse of energy out
all over the galaxy
some of it came straight to us but some
of it went sideways
hit uh sagittarius b2
350 years later and we're now seeing
the echo of that illumination
coming the 26 000 light years
direct back to us so some of the light
took a longer path
by going sideways for 350 years and then
being bounced back in our direction
but we can compute the brightness and
figure out that
sagittarius a star must have been
outputting a million times as much
energy
during the outburst that caused this
reflection
as it is today so it was probably
feeding voraciously on something that
fell into it
and output a million times the power
output
for a period of about 12 years while it
consumed this meal
and then faded back to normal and
the direct pulse of x and gamma ray
light a million times stronger than the
current emissions
would have arrived on earth about 300
years ago
and interestingly enough if you look
back at the climate record
that's in the period around about the
time of newton and the uh time of the
little ice age
and in fact there was a sudden cooling
of the earth's climate
recorded which we do really have a net
proper explanation for
in around about 1650 a.d which could
well have been
the influence of this direct pulse of
x and gamma rays from sagittarius a star
taking 26 000 years to get straight to
us
and then we're seeing the light echo of
it 350 years later
having bounced off sagittarius b2 and
taken
two sides of a long thin triangle
now there was a near miss not so long
ago
with a cloud of gas and dust
that's shown here in the yellow orange
red and white and blue uh positions
swinging past the red cross that marks
the position of
the supermassive black hole it was on
one of these elliptical orbit paths
and we thought it was going to fall in
and be shredded
but it actually moved through past and
escaped
but it was distorted and stretched and
probably lost some material
to the accretion disk on the way past
but it didn't create
a fantastic increasing the brightness
of sagittarius a star but it's
interesting to think that had it done so
it might again
have sent vast amounts of gamma rays our
way
and these would affect the upper
atmosphere perhaps uh
destroying the ozone layer doing other
photochemical damage in the process so
uh the life on earth is it's still
dependent on this
and if we look back even further in time
to six million years ago
certainly the black hole was very very
active then
because it has left the trace of these
two
enormous fermi bubbles of hot
energized gas above and below the plane
of the milky way
the fermi bubbles emit in x-rays and
gamma rays
and are the the uh results of the
jets of material that will shot out
along the polar spin axis
of the black hole black holes are
terribly messy eaters they
material spirals in down the accretion
disk
gets very hot and ionized and then gets
tangled up with the
magnetic field of the black hole which
is
spun and twisted into great helices that
come
out as jets along the spin axis and that
carries these
enormous jets outwards and it's uh
spun and whirled around because not
perfectly aligned
to the plane of the galaxy so it's
filled out these two enormous bubbles
of hot gas and as i said this was a
relic
of a vast eruption six million years ago
and so our very very early ancestors who
were still
probably swinging around in the trees at
this point might well have observed
the center of our black hole center of
our galaxy
being an immensely bright object back at
that time
now the sun of course orbits around the
center of the
galaxy and obeys the laws of gravity in
the process
so it takes an orbit around the common
center of mass
and we estimate that orbit takes between
two to
five and 250 million years
to complete so a galactic year is around
about
230 million years say
we're not certain and it does vary a
little bit because
the sun's path is dependent on the
distribution of
matter in and around the spiral arms
and so that can speed us up or slow us
down a little bit
the speed that we're traveling at half a
million miles an hour
is a terrific rate it's a tenth of the
speed of light
so uh sorry one percent point one
percent of the speed
of light a tenth of a percent and uh
that's uh
enough to start worrying about in terms
of calculating things with
uh needing to worry about relativity if
you want to get the right answer
since the formation of the milky way
galaxy
um they have been around about 13
billion years
since the sun was born about 5 billion
years ago
it has therefore gone round 21 times so
it's 21 galactic years
which is a reasonable number to conjure
with and
you can look at the chronology of
earth's history in terms of galactic
years
makes quite an interesting way of doing
it and
without the numbers becoming very large
but the path of uh the the sun is quite
strange in some ways in that it's also
got an up and down wobble induced
and that wobble is induced by the
interactions with the
density waves of the spiral arms
so it's not going around just in one
flat plane
and again that's partly what makes the
orbit slightly difficult to predict
i'm sorry if this diagram is a little
bit busy but we've got the
the galactic plane marked in the blue
here
with sagittarius a star in the middle
and the galactic north pole south pole
in blue and the sun
that's 26 000 light years away
orbiting around the center as i've said
and the solar system is oriented at an
angle like this
such that the plane of earth's orbit
gives us the north pole of the solar
system
which is pointing out in this direction
and then the earth is orbiting around
that
with another tilt of 23 degrees and
giving us
the north pole of the earth
and so they're not perfectly aligned but
the north pole of the galaxy the north
pole of
our sky are broadly aligned
and the south pole and the southern
skies are pointing towards the
uh the southern part of the galaxy
and this tends to mean we can actually
see the
uh center of the galaxy better from
the southern hemisphere than we can from
the northern hemisphere
i'm afraid this diagram takes a little
bit of getting your head around
in terms of the the 3d aspects of it
but those periodic wobbles carrying us
above and below the plane of the
solar system are quite interesting
because every 30 million years
or so we cross through the plane of the
galaxy at the moment we're around
7 000 light years
above the plane of the galaxy and moving
towards the extreme position
but we will turn around and go back down
again so we passed the through the
center
a number of million years ago and we'll
dip back down again and go back through
it again
and in fact it was about 11 or 12
million years ago that we last
passed through the center central plain
now this diagram here
shows the
rate at which craters have been forming
on the earth over the last 300 million
years
so now here going backwards in time
the rate at which new craters have been
formed has not been a constant
and has wobbled up and down and if it
looks like it's getting less
in time that's an artifact that craters
get rubbed out
over time and so in fact there were more
craters being formed in the past
than there are now it's just that we
can't find them all
because they get erased um but
nevertheless over any short time window
of this
the relative change is not affected by
that
the crucial point is you can see it's
peaky
and we've marked some of the particular
large crater events
such as the chick salute crater that
took out the dinosaurs at 66 million
years ago
was part of a particularly heavy period
of bombardment
but there have been others and some of
the other large craters are also
at or near the peaks of other larger
bombardments
what's more interesting is that the
interval between these particular
bombardments is not exactly constant
but is of the order of every 30 million
years or so
and the last time as i say we passed
through the plane of the
galaxy was here when there was another
large bombardment to or medium-sized
bombardment with no particularly large
crater formed that we know of
so maybe these cratering events
are con uh
controlled by our movement through the
plane of the galaxy
here's another view of the same thing
only here we've plotted extinction
events
in orange and craters in red
and you can see that there is a roughly
rough pattern in the intervals between
cratering
between extinction events 25
to 30 million years or so
and the same interval roughly
speaking between major cratering events
so one set of uh geologists
argue that the extinctions are caused by
cratering events
and that's certainly their favored
explanation
for the chick uh dinosaur
extinction but it seems that
a lot of these uh extinction events
may have an extraterrestrial origin
the other side of things people argue
that
at no no it's actually volcanic
eruptions causing flood
flood basalt uh events pouring enormous
amounts of sulfur dioxide and carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere
and wrecking the environment and it's
nothing to do with cratering
and so if we plot flood basalt events
on the same chart they line up quite
well with
many of the major extinction events
in particular the chick-fil-a one so
scientists are on both sides of this is
it an impact was it the
uh the denon traps in india erupting
you know there are some flood battle
events that don't seem to lead to
um extinctions so i tend to be
with my astronomical bias in favor
perhaps
of impacts but
the connection has recently been made
with the idea that maybe
both the incidents of impact
and the flood basalt eruptions are both
linked
to the same astronomical cause
and that cause being our crossing
of the galactic plane
and the hypothesis is that
as we cross through the galactic plane
where there is a concentration of dark
matter
this mysterious substance that we've
never detected
that accounts for three quarters of the
mass of our galaxy or more and
is subject almost
entirely to the law of gravity alone and
probably
interacts via the weak force which is
also
responsible for the radioactivity of
heavy elements but not to
electromagnetism
or anything else so we can't see it with
ordinary lights or any other
uh of our telescope instruments
but if that dark matter is spread in a
thin disk and is a
particularly dense in the plane of the
milky way as the earth passes through it
large amounts of dark matter would sweep
through
the central core of the earth and
if they did so and either got
trapped there or were present there in
large enough numbers
then perhaps they could interact via the
weak nuclear force with the dense heavy
elements
that are trapped in the central core of
the earth
and leads to a burst of
additional radioactive decay
or other nuclear processes involving the
decay of dark matter
that we don't yet understand but
nevertheless cause
a burst of energy to be released in the
core of the planet
and that might produce an enormous magma
plume which would lead to
a flood basalt volcanic eruption that
could well uh be the root cause of this
so the impacts increase because
of all of the uh interaction of the
earth cloud
with the dirt and dust of the galactic
plane
throwing millions of comets into the
inner solar system
increasing the cratering rate on the
earth and risking
extinctions and at the same time dark
matter
is upsetting the energy balance of the
earth's core
and causing it to release enormous
amounts of volcanic eruptions
so maybe this is why both occur
simultaneously and we will never be able
to
separate the one from the other because
they are both
caused by this 30 million year galactic
plane crossing in which case
it's been 11 or 12 million years since
we last did it so the good news is that
we have quite a long time 18
million years or so before the next
round of doom uh from the galaxy
and our orbit around it so
you don't need to worry about uh it's uh
coming to get us next wednesday
and with that i shall bring it to a
close thank you very much